# False Spring Projections

Spatiotemporal patterns of green-up dates, last spring freezes, and false springs are modeled across the contiguous United States from 1950 to 2099 using the MACAv2-METDATA dataset.

## I. Introduction
There is evidence that the timing of plant green-up (GU), observable across plant species through bud-burst, leaf-out, and flowering, is advancing earlier in the year across the globe coincident with a changing climate [Cayan et al. 2001; Schwartz et al. 2006; Cleland et al. 2007; Bennie et al. 2010; Peterson and Abatzoglou 2014]. Responding to seasonal early-year warming daily temperatures and lengthening daylight, plant GU generally marks the onset of spring. The satellite-observable "green wave" beginning in the North Hemisphere mid-latitudes sweeps pole-ward as winter transitions to spring, bringing about direct changes in ecologic and physical systems across multiple scales. Regional- and continental-scale GU directly modifies global atmospheric carbon concentrations and albedo, while landscape-scale GU modifies local surface energy budgets, evapotranspiration, and nutrient cycling [Cannell and Smith 1986; Schwartz 1993; Cleland et al. 2007; Gu et al. 2008]. Plant GU is also interconnected with other phenological phenomena, such as animal life cycles, insect emergence, and bird migration patterns [Brovkin 2002]. Advancing plant GU, a result of increased winter and spring minimum temperatures and fewer cold days and nights, may result in asynchrony across these systems and dynamics [Gu et al. 2008]. One such asynchrony is termed a false spring.

False spring events are normally characterized by abnormally warm meteorologic conditions giving rise to premature plant GU, followed by a subsequent freeze or series of freezes [Peterson and Abatzoglou 2014]. Such freeze events can induce extensive damage or mortality to the sensitive developing tissue exposed through the GU process. The physiologic damage resultant from freeze events varies amongst plant individuals, species, and communities, but quantified false springs at regional scales - notably the 2007 southeastern U.S. event and 2012 midwest U.S. event - report widespread albiet heterogenous 'ripple effects' across ecosystem structures and dynamics [Gu et al. 2008; Knudson 2012]. Such effects include altered plant communities, reduced ecosystem productivity and vigor, constrained nutrient cycling and carbon sequestration, and modified surface energy budgets. Agricultural systems can be particularly sensitive to false springs, and economic losses in the United States (U.S.) alone routinely exceed $2 billion a year as a result of reduced crop vigor and yield [Gu et al. 2008; Lott et al. 2010].

Previous research highlighted an asymmetric advancement of plant GU and freeze events across the contiguous U.S over the 1920-2013 period, with freeze events advancing at a greater temporal and spatial magnitude relative to plant GU [Peterson and Abatzoglou 2014]. This asymmetry was especially notable over the 1990s and 2000s, with much of the U.S. experiencing significant reduced false spring exposure; the 2007 southeastern U.S. and 2012 eastern U.S. false spring events, however, highlight the complexity and uncertainty arising from this bioclimatic asymmetry. Continued and accelerated climate change throughout the 21st century may paradoxically increase cold damage or mortality risks even with reduced false spring exposure [Peterson and Abatzoglou 2014]. Plants will continue to prematurely break winter dormancy and undertake photosynthesis and respiration coincident with additional early-year warmth, and high-amplitude synoptic shifts in meteorologic regimes are likely to persist in the coming decades [Ault et al. 2013]. It is relevant to examine how plant GU, freeze events, and false springs are likely to respond to climate change through the 21st century. 

This study asks how plant GU, freeze events, and false springs are likely to respond to projected changes in climate from 2020 to 2099 across the contiguous U.S under different climate scenarios. To overcome the limitations of sensitivity analyses as detailed in Peterson and Abatzoglou [2014], we employ high-resolution statistically downscaled global climate model (GCM) output from the MACA-METDATAv2 dataset [Abatzoglou and Brown 2012]. We focus our analysis on future anomalies of plant GU, freeze events, and false springs for the climatological periods 2020-2059 (mid-century) and 2060-2099 (late-century) under the two Representative Concentration Pathways 4.5 (RCP4.5) and 8.5 (RCP8.5). The changing meteorologic conditions driving the spatial and temporal changes of the bioclimatic events are likewise characterized.


## II. Methods
Daily minimum temperature was provided by twenty GCMs participating in the fifth phase of the Climate Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) [Taylor et al. 2012]. Employing the Multivariate Adaptive Constructed Analogs (MACA) method by Abatzoglou and Brown [2012] and the gridded surface meteorological training dataset of Abatzoglou [2011], the downscaled GCM output convers both historical (1950-2005) and future (2006-2099) periods, with the latter using RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 to model multiple end-of-century radiative forcings arising from variable emission, socioceconomic, and climate and atmosphere feedback scenarios. The MACA-METDATAv2 dataset was found to be well-suited for ecological applications, notably in areas of complex terrain [Abatzoglou and Brown 2012].

Plant GU is modeled using the Growing Season Index (GSI) following Jolly et al. [2005] and Peterson & Abatzoglou [2014]. This empirical phenological model produces an index bounded by 0 and 1 indicating plant foliage as confined by climatic limits by integrating the weighted effects of minimum temperature, photoperiod, and vapor pressure deficit (VPD) [Jolly et al. 2005]. The GSI is well-suited to large spatiotemporal analyses as it is not parameterized for any specific plant species nor any specific ecoregion [Jolly et al. 2005]. Prior to modeling future plant GU dates, VPD was determined to be a non-limiting factor in observed plant GU and so held at a non-constraining value [Supplemental material]. The GSI is normalized by dividing local GSI by the 1950-2005 95th percentile [M. Jolly, personal communication, 2011]. GU is then defined as the first calendar day of each year where the 21-day moving average of the normalized GSI meets or exceeds 0.5.

Freeze events are defined as the last spring freeze (LSF) prior to 1 July meeting or exceeding the cold damage threshold of -2.2°C [Schwartz et al. 2006; Peterson & Abatzoglou 2014]. This threshold is known to induce cold damage and mortality across plant individuals, communities, and species [CITATION]. From annual GU and LSF dates, false springs are derived using a binary classification where 1 corresponds to LSF occurring 7-days post-GU and 0 corresponds to the negative. To facilitate the reporting and use of these binary false spring classifications, a false spring exposure index (FSEI) is calculated as the percent of years in a given period experiencing false springs [Peterson & Abatzoglou 2014].

The GSI model, LSF threshold, and FSEI are derived for all grid points for all years 1950-2099 across all twenty models and two RCPs included in the MACA-METDATAv2 dataset. The historical values (1950-2005) are averaged and used as reference values from which changes for two future climatological periods - mid-century, corresponding to 2020-2059, and late-century, corresponding to 2060-2099 - are derived. For brevity, we report the multi-model mean values for GU, LSF, and FSEI.


## III. Results
The multi-model mean GU date, LSF date, and FSEI for the reference period 1950-2005 mirror the latitudinal, elevation, and maritime controls reported by previous research (Figure 1) [e.g., Schwartz et al. 2006; Peterson & Abatzoglou 2014] and show general agreement with values derived from the gridded observational meteorological dataset (METDATA) [Supplemental material; Abatzoglou 2011]. Asynchrony between historic climatolgoical GU and LSF dates are apparent across much of the U.S., with the Northwest (NW), Great Plains (GP), Midwest (MW), and Southeast (SE) experiencing mean LSF 5-days post-GU, the Northeast (NE) experiencing LSF 3 days post-GU, and the Southwest (SW) experiencing similar mean dates (Table 1). Most of the six regions across the U.S. exhibit similar FSEI between 34% and 40% of years across the historic period; the NE exhibited the lowest FSEI at 28% of years, while the SE exhibited the highest FSEI at 40% of years as a result of boundary aggregation and inclusion of the Appalachian Mountain Range.

Climatological GU and LSF dates are projected to advance earlier in the year under both climate scenarios throughout the 21st century across the contiguous U.S., with more extreme changes projected under RCP8.5 relative to RCP4.5 (Figure 2; Table 1). Similar to the spatial distribution of historic climatological dates, projected changes in GU and LSF follow latitudinal and elevation gradients with maritime controls. In general, high-elevation areas concentrated in the western U.S. such as the Rocky Mountains, the Sierra Nevadas, and the Cascade Range exhibit the most acute advancement in mean GU and LSF. The magnitude of LSF advancement is especially notable in these areas, shifting more than 30 days earlier in the late 21st century independent of climate scenarios. Maritime areas along the Pacific Ocean, the Gulf of Mexico, and the Southern Eastern Seaboard are projected to see relatively minor shifts in GU, corresponding to the photoperiod limits imposed by the GSI model. LSF, however, is projected to advance in these regions across both future periods and scenarios. There is additional asymmetry between projected GU and LSF changes across the interior and northeastern areas of the U.S., with GU advancing relative to LSF, highlighting the paradoxical increased cold damage risk arising from climate change.

Changes in FSEI capture the asymmetry between GU and LSF. Independent of scenario and period, the interior and northeastern U.S. are projected to experience similar or increased false spring exposure relative to the 1950-2005 historic period, though regionally-aggregated changes range between 2% and -9% in the late century (Figure 2; Table 1). The NW and SE are likely to experience the greatest reduction in false springs, resulting from alpine sensitivity to changes in minimum temperatures in the NW and photoperiod-limited phenological advancement in the SE [CITATIONS].


